add: getting started on solana intro (#195)
solana-foundation/developer-content: docs/intro/dev.md

## High Level Developer Overview

Development on Solana can be broken down into two main parts:

1. **On-chain Program Development**: This is where you create and deploy custom
   programs directly to the blockchain. Once deployed, anyone who knows how to
   communicate with them can use them. You can write these programs in Rust, C,
   or C++.
2. **Client Development**: This is where you write dApps that communicate with
   on-chain programs. Your apps can submit transactions to perform actions
   on-chain. Client development can be written in any programming language.

The "glue" between working on the client-side and the on-chain side is the
[JSON RPC API](https://solana.com/docs/rpc). Developers working on the
client-side send RPC requests to the Solana network to interact with on-chain
programs. This is very similar to normal development between a frontend and
backend. The major difference with working on Solana is that the backend is a
global permissionless blockchain. This means that anyone can interact with your
on-chain program without the need of issuing API keys or any other form of
permission.

> ![A view of how clients work with the Solana blockchain](/assets/guides/intro/developer_flow.png)

Author: Not a blocker imo but I'm asking Hovin to make a nice picture of this

Toolsuite, run the following command:

```bash
solana-test-validator
```

This will start a local validator on your machine that you can use to test your
programs. You can read more about
[local development](https://solana.com/developers/guides/getstarted/setup-local-development)
under the guides section.

When building on-chain programs, you have a choice to either build with Native
Rust or use the Anchor framework. Anchor is a framework that makes it easier to
build on Solana by providing a higher-level API for developers. Think of Anchor
like building with React for your websites instead of raw Typescript and HTML.
While Typescript and HTML give you more control over your website, React
accelerates your development and makes developing easy. You can read more about
[Anchor](https://www.anchor-lang.com/) on their website.

You'll need a way to test your program. There are a few different ways to test
your program based on your language preference:

- [solana-program-test](https://docs.rs/solana-program-test/latest/solana_program_test/) -
  Testing framework built in Rust
- [solana-bankrun](https://kevinheavey.github.io/solana-bankrun/) - Testing

>   framework built in Python or Typescript

Author: Ah, it got moved under solders with the same module name https://github.com/kevinheavey/solders

---
sidebarLabel: Intro to Development
title: "Getting Started with Solana Development"
description: "Learn how to get started building on Solana"
sidebarSortOrder: 9999
keywords:
  - solana basics
  - tutorial
  - intro to solana development
  - blockchain developer
  - web3 developer
---

Welcome to the Solana developer docs!

This page will include everything you need to know to get started with Solana
development. We'll cover basic requirements, give an overview of how Solana
development works, and provide the critical tools you'll need to get started.

## High Level Developer Overview

Development on Solana can be broken down into two main parts:

1. **On-chain Program Development**: This is where you create and deploy custom
   programs directly to the blockchain. Once deployed, anyone who knows how to
   communicate with them can use them. You can write these programs in Rust, C,

>    or C++.

Author: Worth mentioning, but we should have a recommendation to use Rust as the best maintained.

there are a few different segmented network environments (called clusters) to
facilitate mature testing and CI/CD practices:

- **Mainnet Beta**: The production network where all the action happens.
  Transactions cost real money here.
- **Devnet**: The quality assurance network were you deploy your programs to
  test before deploying to production. Think "staging environment".
- **Local**: The local network that you run on your machine using
  `solana-test-validator` to test your programs. This should be your first
  choice when developing programs.

## Build by Example

While you get started building on Solana, there's a few more resources available
to help accelerate your journey:

- [Solana Cookbook](https://solana.com/developers/cookbook): A collection of
  references and code snippets to help you build on Solana.
- [Solana Program Examples](https://github.com/solana-developers/program-examples):
  A repository of example programs providing building blocks for different
  actions on your programs.
- [Guides](https://solana.com/developers/guides): Tutorials and guides to walk
  you through building on Solana.

## Getting Support

> The best support you can find is by asking your question on the
> [Solana StackExchange](https://solana.stackexchange.com/).
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The best support you can find is on [Solana StackExchange](https://solana.stackexchange.com/). Search for your question there first - there's a good chance there will already be a question asked by someone else, with an answer. If it's not there, add a new question! Remember to include as much detail as you can in your question, and please use text (not screenshots) to show error messages, so other people with the same problem can find your question!

```

Reviewer: Just a suggestion. Maybe this is too much detail. WDYT?
